"2112" tells a story set in the city of Megadon in 2112,==[25]== "where individualism and creativity are outlawed with the population controlled by a cabal of malevolent Priests who reside in the Temples of Syrinx".==[15]== A galaxy-wide war resulted in the planets forcefully joining the Solar Federation (symbolized by the "Red Star"). By 2112, the world is controlled by the priests who take orders from giant banks of computers inside the temple.==[25]== 

\> From \<[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2112_(album)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2112_\(album\))\>   
**What’s 2112 all about?**  
==The title suite of Rush’s== _2112_ ==album is set in a totalitarian society where the evil priests of the Temples of Syrinx keep everyone in line. Stability is threatened when a young man finds a guitar, learns to make music on it, and believes the world needs to hear of his great discovery. After the priests of the temple destroy the guitar and send him packing, he envisions a world where music and creativity flourish. Knowing he’ll never see that world, he gives in to despair. The ending is left ambiguous: the singer may have committed suicide, but his struggle may have led to a toppling of the empire. After an instrumental finale with a vicious Lifeson solo, the listener is left with an ominous announcement, “We have assumed control.” A new beginning or a totalitarian clampdown? You decide.==  
==The theme of the individual against totalitarianism was right out of the Ayn Rand playbook, but Rush personalized the story by giving it a young, idealistic hero – the same sort of misfit they’d salute in the later hit single “Subdivisions.”==  
==As the band explained in the accompanying booklet to an anniversary reissue, there was personal relevance as well. The idea of being rebuffed for playing music was especially relevant to them since they were at risk of losing their record deal. Finally, the idea that a government would regulate artistic expression proved to be prophetic, since the days of stickered albums and the== **PMRC** ==were only a few years away.==
 \> From \<[https://www.udiscovermusic.com/stories/rush-2112-album-explained/](https://www.udiscovermusic.com/stories/rush-2112-album-explained/)\>      
**2112** (pronounced "twenty-one twelve") is the fourth studio album by Canadian rock band ==Rush==, released in March 1976==[1]====[2]====[3]====[4]== (or April 1, 1976, according to some sources)==[12]====[13]== by ==Anthem Records==.
 
Music is unknown in this world absent of creativity and individuality, but in "Discovery", a nameless man finds a beaten guitar inside a cave and rediscovers the lost art of music.==[25]====[19]== In "Presentation", the man takes the guitar to the priests at the temple, who say, "Yes, we know, it's nothing new; it's just a waste of time", and then proceed angrily to destroy it and send him away. Next, in "Oracle: The Dream", the man dreams of a new planet, established at the same time as the Solar Federation, where creative people live.==[19]== He awakens, depressed that music is part of such a civilization and that he can never be part of it, and kills himself, in "Soliloquy", originally titled "Soliloquy of the Soul".==[15]== Another planetary war begins in "Grand Finale",==[24]== originally named "Denouement",==[15]== resulting in the ambiguous spoken ending: "Attention all planets of the Solar Federation: We have assumed control". Peart described the ending as a "double surprise ... a real ==Hitchcock== killer".==[25]==
 \> From \<[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2112_(album)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2112_\(album\))\>  

2112 Capital Solutions is a project to help others integrate into the bitcoin economy. We help refine bitcoin best practices to help others maintain sovereignty over their wealth, in the face of future authoritarian dystopia.
 
Since only bitcoin can separate money and state
   

21 is also a popular number in bitcoin and the symmetry with 12 is cool