Part two: What problems does it solve
    
[https://x.com/danieleripoll/status/1705257471487672638?s=46](https://x.com/danieleripoll/status/1705257471487672638?s=46)
 
Why are so many people in power afraid of #Bitcoin ?
 
Because Bitcoin is a wrecking ball.
 
Bitcoin threatens the status quo in myriad ways, and the powers that be can't stand it. They would very much like to keep things as they are.
 
They have and will continue to fight #BTC  with everything they've got, but BTC gives zero fucks. It just keeps working. Tik tok, next block.
 
When the world transitions to a Bitcoin Standard, a lot of things will change forever, including: 👇
 
The existing financial system  
On a Bitcoin Standard, there won't be a need for 160 fiat currencies backed by absolutely nothing, or money created from thin air. This removes power from governments and gives it back to the people.
 
The IMF/World Bank  
No more enslaving entire nations in debt that they can never repay and draining those nations of their precious resources.
 
The Cantillon effect  
Remove the money printer, and you remove the benefit that some people enjoy by being the first to get their hands on the newly printed money. This will level the playing field and will play a role in closing the wealth divide.
 
The global sovereign debt bubble  
It will be impossible to issue more money than there is money available because Bitcoin is not debt. Bitcoin is a new base layer money that cannot be lent out in waves of credit.
 
Consumerism  
People know that fiat loses value quickly, so they consume in order to convert fiat into something real. On a Bitcoin Standard, people will have the incentive to save for the future by spending less today.
 
Fractional reserve banking  
#BTC  cannot be printed from thin air. As history shows, anyone who tries to create more paper BTC than they have real BTC to back it, will get REKT.
 
Endless wars  
America has spent $8 trillion on wars since year 2,000 and has received zero benefit for all of that spending. The world is not safer. In fact, the world is even more dangerous. On a Bitcoin Standard, wars can only be fought to the extent that Bitcoiners are willing to lend money to governments to finance their wars.
 
The Housing Bubble  
Consumers plow their money into real estate to protect the value of their purchasing power. In recent years, the big private equity players like BlackRock are getting into the game for the same reason. But they have the advantage of getting access to money at a fraction of the cost that you and I would pay for a mortgage. It is projected that by 2030, 2/3rds of all US housing will be owned by institutions like BlackRock if we do not change course. When people finally have money that increases in value against real goods and services, the monetary premium of real estate will decrease, bringing the cost of housing closer to its utility value.
 
Monetary Colonialism  
Today, France still has control over 14 African nations by way of monetary authority. It issues a currency called the CFA Franc that these 14 nations must use. The CFA Franc can only be issued by the French central bank and has been devalued by the French on a whim more than once. This arrangement is convenient for France because it has allowed the French to continue looting these African nations as they have for centuries. All they do is print new CFA money and use it to extract valuable resources from Africa such as gold and uranium. Whenever these nations have appointed a leader who promised to restore monetary independence, they have been assassinated. This too would end on a Bitcoin Standard.
 
Bitcoin is a wrecking ball to the powers that be because it destroys corruption and restores freedom and sovereignty to the plebs. #BTC  is the money of the people, by the people, and for the people.