- FFS I need to focus more, I have all the right ingredients I just need to put them together
- Let's face it, making videos is my thing. I need to just get started, I'm done writing and writing and putting things off. I was thinking, what would I really be proud of? What would make me happy? Yes having articles is good, and no I don't think I'm good enough at speaking off the cuff in public. (Maybe with video practice that will change)
    - Sure I want to write my book, well maybe churning out videos and practicing speaking is what I need, and to just be consistent and then ill have enough of a script of my own talking that it will be easy
    - Yes I can master ai and have it work in my voice, and help create scripts, but scripts for what?
    - There will be a whole new incoming class of 2025 that I can make short content for to help
- ~~I need to date ffs~~
    - And staying inside learning and making videos is in direct conflict with the time I could be out there having fun and making memories
- I also need to keep up on all of the shit I fell off on, including daily entropy, working out, walks, meditating, cooking and eating right and saving money. There's literally no way to do it all!! Ha!
- But If I look back at 2022 goals (2021 goals for the [next year](New%20Next%20Year.md)) I pretty much accomplished everything by 2023 so there is definitely progress
    
Main Goals:

- Keep making opportunities for myself to practice meeting people, having fun and spending money on what's important
- Get back into the good habits I started but then fell off
    - Running
    - ~~Boxing~~
    - Meditating
    - Being generally healthy
- TBB youtube channel! Adding to my website, getting out there.
- ~~Bitcoin news media partnerships~~
- No beer 24
- Waking up early!
 
Other things I want to do

- Go to Arizona/West
- Go to Venice again
- Get a bitcoin cert
- Get a GF who I actually vibe with       

As Marcus says, put down your books and build! So what exactly am I building?

- I'm using my knowledge of bitcoin, and technology, and econ/finance/politics/charisma/Ai etc. to help other people with bitcoin
- That's creating educational content, speaking about it to others, inspiring curiosity, etc. it's about being active in my local community and seeing where other people need help. I'm not doing it for the money, although if you're good at something don't ever do it for free.
- The funny thing is, I already know all of this, it's all so obvious. I'm already starting but I'm not going as fast as I can, and I'm not leaving my comfort zone. I guess it's good that I have a foundational level of confidence and comprehension and passion, as well as a notebook filled with stuff and a website to prove to people I'm serious.
- A podcast or a youtube channel, especially pumping out educational content for people to find, will contribute even in some small way. I could always just publish old videos new again for newbies in new cycles and I know how to structure shit since I have a vast collection of insights and quotes and materials. The space is small enough where there's not a lot of youtubers specifically dedicated to bitcoin, and most of it is news and price bullshit (which is important) but there is space for inspiring curiosity and telling the bitcoin story to new people who have no idea
- JC BTC is good for vibes but it's also a force to build a network to get help from others and to tap into NYC.

**What will make me feel fulfilled? What am I working towards?  
Feel free to add or subtract to this list as I change
 
1. Feeling like I made a contribution to human liberty in some significant way
2. Having a family that I love and loves me, and is worth supporting
3. Living stress free, financially free, doing whatever I want whenever I want to
4. Having a network of friends that I like and appreciate and lift me up
       
What do I want for 2024?

- To go on more dates, and improve my dating game.
    - I want future me to know that you don't have to find the one just yet, just keep practicing and good things will come when you least expect them. Don't force anything that doesn't feel right, but also keep up things that you enjoy and don’t hurt you.
- To create even more opportunities for myself to get out there and have friends outside of bitcoin
    - To travel more, take time to plan out my own fun, get a friend to travel with doesn't matter who, or just go out alone, fuck it.
    - That means more clubs and random outings that I'm new to that I don't think I would like, like the Brazilian drum circle
- To build even more for bitcoin in some GC way, and make more friends and have fun
    - Networking with bitcoin news
- I want to keep my easy job while I build my bitcoin self, but maybe something more rewarding will come along that changes everything.
   

*In the event that everything collapses or consciousness ends, or I endure great hardship, remember that life up to this point has been great and I'm extremely lucky in all senses. I've been in the top 1% of all humanity and I don't "deserve" anything more than I've already been given. I will continue to try harder and harder