# sec.gov -- Scraped Content

**URL:** https://sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1588489/000119312524003901/d144925ds3a.htm
**Category:** wayback-waf
**Scrape status:** DONE
**Source notes:** 
**Scraped:** 2026-04-13

---

*Archived version from 2025-12-25 via Wayback Machine*

S-3/A 1 d144925ds3a.htm S-3/A 

##### Table of Contents

**As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 8, 2024**

**Registration No. 333-275079   **

 

 

 

**SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION**

**Washington, D.C. 20549**

 

**Amendment No. 4**

**to**

**FORM  S-3 **

**REGISTRATION STATEMENT**

**_UNDER_**

**_THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933_**

 

 

**Grayscale Bitcoin Trust (BTC)**

**(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in Its Charter)**

 

 

 

|  |  |  |   
---|---|---|---|---  
**Delaware** **(State or Other Jurisdiction of  
Incorporation or Organization)** |   |  **c/o Grayscale Investments, LLC** **290 Harbor Drive, 4 th Floor  
Stamford, Connecticut 06902  
(212) 668-1427** |   |  **46-7019388** **(I.R.S. Employer  
Identification Number)**  
  
**(Address, Including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, Including Area Code, of Registrant ’s Principal Executive Offices) **

 

 

**Michael Sonnenshein**

**Chief Executive Officer**

**Grayscale Investments, LLC**

**290 Harbor Drive, 4 th Floor **

**Stamford, Connecticut 06902**

**(212) 668-1427 **

**(Address, Including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, Including Area Code, of Registrant ’s Principal Executive Offices) **

 

 

**_Copy to:_**

**Joseph A. Hall**

**Dan Gibbons**

**Davis Polk  & Wardwell LLP **

**450 Lexington Avenue**

**New York, New York 10017**

**(212) 450-4000 **

 

 

**Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public** : From time to time after this Registration Statement becomes effective. 

If the only securities being registered on this Form are being offered pursuant to dividend or interest reinvestment plans, please check the following box.  ☐

If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933, other than securities offered only in connection with dividend or interest reinvestment plans, check the following box.  ☒

If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, please check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ☐

If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ☐

If this Form is a registration statement pursuant to General Instruction I.D. or a post-effective amendment thereto that shall become effective upon filing with the Commission pursuant to Rule 462(e) under the Securities Act, check the following box.  ☐

If this Form is a post-effective amendment to a registration statement filed pursuant to General Instruction I.D. filed to register additional securities or additional classes of securities pursuant to Rule 413(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box.  ☐

Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. 

 

|  |  |  |  |  |   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Large accelerated filer |   | ☒ |    | Accelerated filer |   | ☐  
|  |  |   
Non-accelerated filer |   | ☐ |    | Smaller reporting company |   | ☐  
|  |  |   
|   |  |    | Emerging growth company |   | ☐  
  
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the Registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act.  ☐

 

 

**The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective date until the Registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section  8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 or until the Registration Statement shall become effective on such date as the Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine. **

 

 

 

* * *

##### Table of Contents

**EXPLANATORY NOTE**

On December 18, 2023, Grayscale Investments, LLC, the sponsor (the “Sponsor”) of Grayscale Bitcoin Trust (BTC) (the “Trust”), solicited the consent of the shareholders of the Trust (the “Consent Solicitation”) to approve certain proposals to amend the Fifth Amended and Restated Declaration of Trust and Trust Agreement between the Sponsor and Delaware Trust Company, the trustee (the “Trustee”) of the Trust. Following the expiration of the Consent Solicitation on January 7, 2024, and prior to the effectiveness of this registration statement, the Sponsor expects to enter into the Sixth Amended and Restated Declaration of Trust and Trust Agreement (the “Amended Trust Agreement”) with the Trustee, implementing the amendments described in the Trust’s Consent Solicitation Statement included in its definitive proxy statement on Schedule 14A, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 18, 2023, among other amendments. This prospectus has been prepared on the basis that the Amended Trust Agreement has been entered into by the Sponsor and the Trustee. 

* * *

##### Table of Contents

**The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell these securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any state where the offer or sale is not permitted.**

 

**SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED JANUARY 8, 2024**

**PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS**

 

**GRAYSCALE BITCOIN TRUST (BTC)**

 

 

Grayscale Bitcoin Trust (BTC) (the “Trust”) issues common units of fractional undivided beneficial interest (“Shares”), which represent ownership in the Trust. The Trust’s purpose is to hold Bitcoins, which are digital assets that are created and transmitted through the operations of the peer-to-peer Bitcoin Network, a decentralized network of computers that operates on cryptographic protocols. The Trust’s investment objective is for the value of the Shares (based on Bitcoin per Share) to reflect the value of Bitcoins held by the Trust, as determined by reference to the Index Price (as defined herein), less the Trust’s expenses and other liabilities. While an investment in the Shares is not a direct investment in Bitcoin, the Shares are designed to provide investors with a cost-effective and convenient way to gain investment exposure to Bitcoin. Grayscale Investments, LLC is the sponsor of the Trust (the “Sponsor”), Delaware Trust Company is the trustee of the Trust (the “Trustee”), The Bank of New York Mellon is the transfer agent of the Trust (in such capacity, the “Transfer Agent”) and the administrator of the Trust (in such capacity, the “Administrator”), Coinbase, Inc. is the prime broker of the Trust (the “Prime Broker”) and Coinbase Custody Trust Company, LLC is the custodian of the Trust (the “Custodian”). 

The Trust intends to list the shares on NYSE Arca, Inc. (“NYSE Arca”) under the symbol “GBTC.” It is expected that the Shares will be sold to the public at varying prices to be determined by reference to, among other considerations, the price of Bitcoin and the trading price of the Shares on the NYSE Arca at the time of each sale. 

The Shares may be purchased from the Trust only in one or more blocks of 10,000 Shares (a block of 10,000 Shares is called a “Basket”). The Trust issues Baskets of Shares to certain authorized participants (“Authorized Participants”) on an ongoing basis as described in “Plan of Distribution.” In addition, the Trust redeems Shares in Baskets on an ongoing basis from Authorized Participants. The Trust is currently able to accept Cash Orders (as defined herein), pursuant to which an Authorized Participant will deposit cash into, or accept cash from, the Cash Account in connection with the creation and redemption of Baskets, and a third party (a “Liquidity Provider”) that is not an agent of, or otherwise acting on behalf of, such Authorized Participant will obtain or receive Bitcoin in exchange for cash in connection with such order. However, and in common with other spot Bitcoin exchange-traded products, the Trust is not at this time able to create and redeem shares via in-kind transactions with Authorized Participants, and there has yet to be definitive regulatory guidance on whether and how registered broker-dealers can hold and deal in Bitcoin in compliance with the federal securities laws. To the extent further regulatory clarity emerges, the Sponsor expects NYSE Arca to seek the necessary regulatory approval to amend its listing rules to permit the Trust to do so (the “In-Kind Regulatory Approval”). Subject to NYSE Arca seeking and obtaining In-Kind Regulatory Approval, in the future the Trust may also create and redeem Shares via in-kind transactions with Authorized Participants or their designees (any such designee, an “AP Designee”) in exchange for Bitcoin. There can be no assurance as to when such regulatory clarity will emerge, or when NYSE Arca will seek or obtain such regulatory approval, if at all. See “Creation and Redemption of Shares.” Some of the activities of the Authorized Participants will result in their being deemed participants in a distribution in a manner which would render them statutory underwriters and subject them to the prospectus-delivery and liability provisions under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). See “Plan of Distribution.” As of January 4, 2024, the number of Bitcoins required to create a Basket of Shares is approximately 8.945946 Bitcoins. 

 

 

**Investing in the Shares involves significant risks. You should carefully consider therisk factors described beginning on page 17 in this prospectus, in “Part I—Item 1A. Risk Factors” beginning on page 44 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022, in “Part II—Item 1A. Risk Factors” beginning on page 19 in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2023, in any applicable prospectus supplement and in the other documents incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference herein before you invest in the Shares. **

 

 

**Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or disapproved of the securities offered in this prospectus, or determined if this prospectus is truthful or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.**

The Shares are neither interests in nor obligations of the Sponsor or the Trustee. 

The U.S. dollar value of a Basket of Shares at 4:00 p.m., New York time, on the trade date of a creation or redemption order is equal to the “Basket Amount”, which is the number of Bitcoins required to create or redeem a Basket of Shares, multiplied by the “Index Price,” which is the U.S. dollar value of a Bitcoin derived from the Digital Asset Trading Platforms that are reflected in the CoinDesk Bitcoin Price Index (XBX) (the “Index”), calculated at 4:00 p.m., New York time, on each business day. The Index Price is calculated using non-GAAP methodology and is not used in the Trust’s financial statements. 

**The date of this prospectus is                 , 2024. **

* * *

##### Table of Contents

**TABLE OF CONTENTS**

 

 

 

|  |  |  |   
---|---|---|---|---  
  |    | **Page** |    
Forward-Looking Statements |    |   | ii |    
Prospectus Summary |    |   | 1 |    
The Offering |    |   | 5 |    
Risk Factors |    |   | 17 |    
Use of Proceeds |    |   | 27 |    
Description of Shares |    |   | 28 |    
Creation and Redemption of Shares |    |   | 31 |    
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences |    |   | 36 |    
ERISA and Related Considerations |    |   | 43 |    
Plan of Distribution |    |   | 45 |    
Legal Matters |    |   | 47 |    
Experts |    |   | 47 |    
Where You Can Find More Information; Incorporation of Certain Information by Reference |    |   | 47 |    
Glossary of Defined Terms |    |   | 49 |    
  
Neither the Trust nor the Sponsor has authorized anyone to provide you with any information other than that contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus, any prospectus supplement or any free writing prospectus prepared by or on behalf of the Trust. Neither the Trust nor the Sponsor takes any responsibility for, and can provide no assurance as to the reliability of, any information that others may give you. Neither the Trust nor the Sponsor is making an offer to sell any security or soliciting any offer to buy any security in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted. You should not assume that the information appearing in this prospectus, any accompanying prospectus supplement and any free writing prospectus or any document incorporated by reference is accurate as of any date other than the respective dates on the front of such documents. The Trust’s business, assets, financial condition, results of operations and prospects may have changed since those dates. 

This prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell, or an invitation on behalf of the Trust or the Sponsor, to subscribe to or purchase any securities, and may not be used for or in connection with an offer or solicitation by anyone, in any jurisdiction in which such an offer or solicitation is not authorized or to any person to whom it is unlawful to make such an offer or solicitation. 

Authorized Participants may be required to deliver a prospectus when making transactions in the Shares. 

This prospectus summarizes certain documents and other information in a manner the Sponsor believes to be accurate. In making an investment decision, you must rely on your own examination of the Trust, the Bitcoin industry, the operation of the Bitcoin market and the terms of the offering and the Shares, including the merits and risks involved. Although the Sponsor believes this information to be reliable, the accuracy and completeness of this information is not guaranteed and has not been independently verified. 

See “Glossary of Defined Terms” for the definition of certain capitalized terms used in this prospectus. This prospectus supplements and where applicable amends the Memorandum, as defined in the Trust Agreement (as defined herein) of the Trust, for general purposes. 

 

i 

* * *

##### Table of Contents

**FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS**

This prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference herein contain “forward-looking statements” with respect to the Trust’s financial conditions, results of operations, plans, objectives, future performance and business. Statements preceded by, followed by or that include words such as “may,” “might,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential” or “continue,” the negative of these terms and other similar expressions are intended to identify some of the forward-looking statements. All statements (other than statements of historical fact) included in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus that address activities, events or developments that will or may occur in the future, including such matters as changes in market prices and conditions, the Trust’s operations, the Sponsor’s plans and references to the Trust’s future success and other similar matters are forward-looking statements. These statements are only predictions. Actual events or results may differ materially from such statements. These statements are based upon certain assumptions and analyses the Sponsor made based on its perception of historical trends, current conditions and expected future developments, as well as other factors appropriate in the circumstances. You should specifically consider the numerous risks described in this prospectus, in “Part I—Item 1A. Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022 (the “Annual Report”), in “Part II—Item 1A. Risk Factors” in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2023 (the “Q2 2023 Quarterly Report”), in any applicable prospectus supplement and in the other documents incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference herein. Whether or not actual results and developments will conform to the Sponsor’s expectations and predictions, however, is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including: 

 

  | • |   |  recent developments in the digital asset economy which have led to extreme volatility and disruption in digital asset markets, a loss of confidence in participants of the digital asset ecosystem, significant negative publicity surrounding digital assets broadly and market-wide declines in liquidity;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  the extreme volatility of trading prices that many digital assets, including Bitcoin, have experienced in recent periods and may continue to experience, which could cause the value of the Shares to be volatile and/or have a material adverse effect on the value of the Shares;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  the recentness of the development of digital assets and the uncertain medium-to-long term value of the Shares due to a number of factors relating to the capabilities and development of blockchain technologies and to the fundamental investment characteristics of digital assets;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  the value of the Shares depending on the acceptance of digital assets, such as Bitcoin, which represent a new and rapidly evolving industry;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  the value of the Shares relating directly to the value of Bitcoin then held by the Trust, the value of which may be highly volatile and subject to fluctuations due to a number of factors;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  a temporary or permanent “fork” or a “clone”, which could adversely affect the value of the Shares;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  the unregulated nature and lack of transparency surrounding the operations of Digital Asset Trading Platforms, which may adversely affect the value of digital assets and, consequently, the value of the Shares;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  the limited history of the Index;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  competition from the emergence or growth of other digital assets or methods of investing in Bitcoin could have a negative impact on the price of Bitcoin and adversely affect the value of the Shares;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  the liquidity of the Shares may be affected if Authorized Participants cease to perform their obligations under the Participant Agreements or the Liquidity Engager is unable to engage Liquidity Providers;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  the commencement of a redemption program, in conjunction with the listing of the Shares on the NYSE Arca, may impact whether the Shares trade at a discount or premium to the NAV per Share;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

  | • |   |  the possibility that the Shares may trade at a price that is at, above or below the Trust’s NAV per Share as a result of the non-current trading hours between NYSE Arca and the Digital Asset Trading Platform Market;   
---|---|---|---  
  
 

ii 

* * *

##### Table of Contents

  | • |   |  regulatory changes or actions by the U.S. Congress or any U.S. federal or state agencies that may affect the value of the Shares or restrict the use of one or more digital assets, mining activity or the operation of their networks or the Digital Asset Trading Pl

[... truncated at 20,000 characters ...]
