# thearenagroup.net -- Scraped Content

**URL:** https://thearenagroup.net/terms-of-use
**Category:** scrapable
**Scrape status:** DONE
**Source notes:** MP4MF\Separation of Money and State.md
**Scraped:** 2026-04-12

---

[](https://thearenagroup.net/) __
      * [About Us __](https://thearenagroup.net/ "About Us")
      * [Our Brands __](https://thearenagroup.net/our-brands/ "Our Brands")
      * [Leadership __](https://thearenagroup.net/leadership/ "Leadership")
      * [Investors __](http://investors.thearenagroup.net/ "Investors")
      * [Careers __](https://thearenagroup.net/careers/ "Careers")
      * [Press __](https://thearenagroup.net/news-room/ "Press")
      * [Contact __](https://thearenagroup.net/contact-us/ "Contact")
      * __Search __
TERMS OF USE **Last Updated and Effective: October 31, 2022** These User Terms of Use (“**Terms** ”) apply to your use of the platform of websites and online services (the “**Platform** ”) provided by The Arena Group Holdings, Inc. and its subsidiaries and affiliated businesses including Athlon Sports, TheStreet, Inc., HubPages, The Arena Platform, Inc., The Arena Media Brands, LLC, and College Spun Media Incorporated(“**Arena,** ” “**we** ,” or “**us** ”). Throughout the Platform, we contract with third-party content creators and publishers (“**Partners** ”) to permit them to publish articles, blogs and other content on the Platform (“**Partner Content** ”). Use of our Platform as a Partner is subject to separate terms. If you are a Partner, then these Terms apply only to your use of our Platform as an end user of other Partner Content, User Content or Author Content (as defined in Section 4(b) below). In addition, pursuant to the Author Submission and Monetization Addendum (“Addendum”), which is hereby incorporated into these Terms of Use and available [**here**](https://thearenagroup.net/author-submission-and-monetization-addendum/) , we may permit a user on the Platform who is an Author to publish Author Content and join the Earnings Program. **PLEASE NOTE: Section 16 contains a mandatory arbitration provision and class action waiver, which requires you to arbitrate certain disputes and claims with us and limits the manner in which you can seek relief from us. In addition, Section 3 contains terms for auto-renewing subscription payments and free trials (including how to cancel).** If you have any questions about these Terms or our Platform, please contact us at service@thearenagroup.net. For information about how we collect, use, share and otherwise process information about you, please see our [Privacy Policy](https://thearenagroup.net/privacy-policy/).
      1. ELIGIBILITY
      * You may not use the Platform if you are under 13 or if you are between the ages of 13 and 16 and live in a jurisdiction where parental consent would be required for us to process your personal information. We reserve the right to refuse access by users under certain ages, as set in our sole discretion from time to time.
      * If you are under 18 years of age (or the age of legal majority where you live), you may use our Platform only with the permission of a parent or legal guardian who agrees to be bound by these Terms. If you are a parent or legal guardian of a user under the age of 18 (or the age of legal majority where you live), you agree to be fully responsible for the acts or omissions of such user, including any breach of these Terms, and for determining the suitability of the Platform for such user.
      2. USER ACCOUNTS
      * If you register for an account to use our Platform, you must provide accurate account information and ensure that you maintain the accuracy of this information at all times. You also must maintain the security of your account (including by logging out of your account at the end of each session), and promptly notify us if you discover or suspect that someone has accessed your account or your account credentials without your permission. If you permit others to use your account, you are responsible for the activities of those users. We reserve the right to reclaim usernames for any reason, including on behalf of businesses or individuals that hold trademark rights or other legal claims in those usernames.
      * Arena at any time and for any reason, in its sole discretion and without any liability to you or any third-party, may suspend or terminate your account or use of or access to the Platform (or any portion thereof).
      3. SUBSCRIPTIONS
**Please note that other or additional terms and conditions (“Other Subscription Terms”) may apply to the purchase and renewal of subscriptions by you on Arena websites. Such Other Subscription Terms will be available through the particular Arena website and will govern the purchase and renewal of the specific subscriptions to which they apply.**
      * **Pricing.** Prices for our subscriptions are subject to change at any time, but changes will not affect any purchase you have already placed except that for auto-renewing subscriptions, price changes will take effect when indicated in our email notice to you.
      * **Taxes.** To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, you are responsible for any applicable sales, use, duty, customs or other governmental taxes, levies or fees (“**Taxes** ”) due with respect to your purchase through our Platform. We will present an estimate of Taxes we collect at checkout, except where we have clearly stated in writing that a price includes Taxes. For U.S. users, the actual Taxes charged may be adjusted from the amount shown at checkout. Several factors may cause this, such as variances between processor programs and changes in tax rates. You may have a duty to directly report and pay Taxes if we do not collect such Taxes.
      * **Payment Method.** Only valid payment methods acceptable to us may be used to complete a purchase via the Platform. You represent and warrant that you are authorized to use your designated payment method. You authorize us to charge your designated payment method for the total amount of your purchase (including any applicable taxes and any shipping and handling charges). If a payment is not successfully settled, due to expiration, insufficient funds, or otherwise, you remain responsible for any uncollected amounts.
      * **Auto-Renewal Terms. If you purchase a subscription from us to access or use the Platform (including a subscription entitling you to access certain Partner Content), you will have the option to elect auto-renewal. If you elect auto-renewal, the terms of this Section 3(d) apply and your subscription will auto renew for subsequent subscription periods of equal length until you cancel your subscription or we terminate it. The subscription period and the cost of the subscription (during and after any initial promotional period) are disclosed via the Platform prior to purchase. We automatically bill your payment method upon the expiration of your current subscription period (you can review your current subscription period by visiting the user preferences section of your Arena account profile). You may cancel your Arena subscription at any time by contacting us at**[**support@thearenagroup.net**](mailto:support@thearenagroup.net)**, and you will continue to have access through the end of your subscription period (or free trial period, if applicable). You will not have the right to receive any pro-rated refunds if you cancel your subscription period early. You must cancel your subscription at least 3 days before the end of your current subscription period in order to avoid being billed for the next subscription period.**
      * **Free Trials. Your subscription may start with a free trial. Arena reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to determine your free trial eligibility. Our Platform will indicate whether or not the free trial will automatically convert to a paid subscription upon expiration of the trial period. If so, unless you cancel your subscription prior to the end of the free trial period, we will begin billing your payment method on a recurring basis for your subscription upon expiration of the free trial period until you cancel your subscription or we terminate it.**
      * **Errors.** In the event of an error, we reserve the right to correct the error and revise your purchase accordingly (which includes charging the correct price) or to cancel the purchase and refund any amount charged.
      * **No Refunds**. Except to the extent refunds are required by law, payments are nonrefundable and there are no refunds. However, we may, in our sole discretion, provide a refund or discount in certain cases.
      4. USER CONTENT AND AUTHOR CONTENT
      * Our Platform may allow you and other users to post or otherwise submit comments, messages, photos, ratings, and other materials (collectively, “**User Content** ”) on Partner Content, Author Content, or otherwise on the Platform. You grant Arena a perpetual, irrevocable, nonexclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, fully paid, and sublicensable license to use, reproduce, modify, adapt, publish, translate, create derivative works from, distribute, publicly perform and display your User Content and any name, username or likeness provided in connection with your User Content for any purpose and in all media formats and channels now known or later developed without compensation to you for any purpose. For purposes of clarity only, distribution of your User Content by Arena via the Platform (or otherwise) may be to all of: (i) Arena owned and/or Arena-operated properties and/or entities, or (ii) third-party properties and/or entities that are distribution partners of Arena via the Platform or other agreement. Except for the license you grant above, you retain all rights in and to your User Content, as between you and Arena.
      * Our Platform may allow you to submit works of authorship (including but not limited to written materials, images, illustrations, audio, videos, graphics, artwork, stories, themes, hyperlinks, objects, and other materials and/or content **“Author Content”**), for the purpose of the Platform publishing, distributing, and/or potentially monetizing such Author Content on your behalf. For the avoidance of doubt, User Content is not deemed to be Author Content.
      * User Content and Author Content are together referred to as “**Submitted Content** ”).
      * You may not create, post, store or share any Submitted Content that violates these Terms. You are solely responsible for your Submitted Content. You represent and warrant that your Submitted Content, and our use thereof as permitted by these Terms, will not violate any rights of or cause injury to any person or entity and that you have all rights necessary to grant us the license above. Although we have no obligation to screen, edit or monitor Submitted Content, we may elect not to publish, to delete, or to remove Submitted Content at any time and for any reason with or without notice. Your decision to submit Submitted Content to the Platform is voluntary, and at your discretion.
      * Arena may preserve and store Submitted Content (including, for a commercially reasonable time, Author Content you have removed from the Platform), and may disclose such content if required to do so by law or if Arena believes in good faith that such preservation or disclosure is reasonably necessary to: (i) comply with legal process (e.g., subpoenas); (ii) enforce these Terms; (iii) respond to claims that any Submitted Content violates the rights of third parties; or (iv) protect the rights, property, or personal safety of Arena, its Partners, its users and the public.
      5. USER CONDUCT AND CONTENT
      * Subject to your compliance with these Terms, you may use the Platform only for your own personal, noncommercial use (except as specifically pre-approved in writing by Arena for commercial use). Any use of the Platform other than as specifically authorized herein, without our prior written permission, is strictly prohibited.
      * You will not violate any applicable law, contract, intellectual property right or other third-party right or commit a tort in connection with your use of our Platform, and you are solely responsible for your conduct while using our Platform. Further, you will not:  

        * Engage in any harassing, threatening, intimidating, predatory, discriminatory or stalking conduct;
        * Use or attempt to use another user’s account without authorization from that user and Arena;
        * Impersonate or post on behalf or any person or entity or otherwise misrepresent your affiliation with a person or entity;
        * make the Platform available to any third party (via a services arrangement, service bureau, lease, sale, resale, or otherwise);
        * Use our Platform to build a competitive product or service;
        * Copy, reproduce, distribute, publicly perform or publicly display all or portions of our Platform, except as expressly permitted by us or our licensors;
        * Modify our Platform, remove any proprietary rights notices or markings, or otherwise make any derivative works based upon our Platform;
        * Use our Platform other than for its intended purpose or in any manner that could interfere with, disrupt, negatively affect or inhibit other users from fully enjoying our Platform or that could damage, disable, overburden or impair the functioning of our Platform in any manner;
        * Reverse engineer any aspect of our Platform or do anything that might discover source code or bypass or circumvent measures employed to prevent or limit access to any part of our Platform;
        * Use any data mining, robots or similar data gathering or extraction methods designed to scrape or extract data from our Platform, including any application that reads areas of RAM used by the Platform to store information;
        * Bypass or ignore instructions contained in our robots.txt file;
        * Circumvent safeguards we implement or usage limitations or attempt to gain unauthorized access to our Platform or other user accounts;
        * Develop or use any applications that interact with our Platform without our prior written authorization;
        * Send, distribute or post spam, unsolicited or bulk solicitations or advertisements, including via chain letters or pyramid schemes;
        * Solicit or otherwise attempt to collect personal information or passwords from other users; or
        * Use our Platform (including data, intellectual property, brand or API) for any illegal or unauthorized purpose, or engage in, encourage or promote any activity that violates these Terms.
      * You may not create, post, store or share any Submitted Content that: 
        * is confidential or that you do not have all necessary rights to disclose;
        * contains or depicts nudity, sexual activity or violence or is otherwise unlawful, libelous, defamatory, obscene, pornographic, indecent, lewd, suggestive, harassing, threatening, invasive of privacy or publicity rights, abusive, inflammatory or fraudulent;
        * Would constitute, encourage or provide instructions for a criminal offense, violate the rights of any party or otherwise create liability or violate any local, state, national or international law;
        * May infringe any patent, trademark, trade secret, copyright or other intellectual or proprietary right of any party;
        * Contains or depicts any statements, remarks or claims that do not reflect your honest views and experiences;
        * Contains any unsolicited promotions (such as “spam”), political campaigning, advertising or solicitations;
        * Contains advertisements or promotions, including to solicit interest in a contest, sweepstake or other promotion;
        * Contains any private or personal information of a third party without such third party’s consent;
        * Contains any viruses, corrupted data or other harmful, disruptive or destructive files or content;
        * Is content written primarily in a language other than English, except in instances where such content is written in the same primary language as the website in which it appears; (e.g., Submitted Content written in Spanish on a Spanish-language website published by Arena);
        * Is identical to, substantially the same as, or derived from other Partner Content, User Content or Author Content and/or content published elsewhere on the Internet (this applies even if you are the owner of that content and/or have the rights to publish that content online); or
        * In our sole judgment, is of poor quality, is objectionable, restricts or inhibits any other person from using or enjoying our Platform, or may expose Arena or others to any harm or liability of any type.
      * Enforcement of this Section 5 is solely at Arena’s discretion, and failure to enforce this section in some instances does not constitute a waiver of our right to enforce it in other instances. In addition, this Section 5 and any action taken or not taken by Arena hereunder shall not create any cause of action on the part of any third party or any reasonable expectation that the Platform will not contain any content that is prohibited by this section.
      6. OWNERSHIP
The Platform, including all content contained therein, including Partner Content and Submitted Content, text, graphics, images, photographs, audio, videos, illustrations, themes, objects, stories, concepts, artwork, and other content contained therein, are owned by Arena or our licensors and are protected under both United States and foreign laws. Except as explicitly stated in these Terms, all rights in and to the Platform are reserved by us or our licensors.
      7. FEEDBACK
You may voluntarily post, submit or otherwise communicate to us any questions, comments, suggestions, ideas, original or creative materials or other information about Arena or our Platform (collectively, “**Feedback** ”). You grant us a perpetual, irrevocable, royalty-free, non-exclusive license to use, reproduce, create derivative works of, sell and otherwise exploit Feedback (or any product or service created based upon such Feedback) for any purpose, commercial or otherwise, without acknowledgment or compensation to you.
      8. TRADEMARKS
The Arena Group, Maven, TheMaven, Maven Coalition, HubPages, Say Media, Tempest, TheStreet, Athlon Sports and our other names, logos, our product or service names, and our slogans are trademarks that are owned or licensed by Arena and may not be copied, imitated, or used, in whole or in part, without our prior written permission. All other trademarks, registered trademarks, product names and company names or logos mentioned on the Platform are the property of their respective owners. Reference to any products, services, processes or other information by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, supplier or otherwise does not constitute or imply endorsement, sponsorship or recommendation by us.
      9. REPEAT INFRINGER POLICY; COPYRIGHT COMPLAINTS
In accordance with the Digital Millennium Copyright Act and other applicable law, we have adopted a policy of terminating, in appropriate circumstances, the accounts of users who repeatedly infringe the intellectual property rights of others. If you believe that anything on our Platform infringes any copyright that you own or control, you may notify Arena’s designated agent as follows: Designated Agent Name: Copyright Manager  
Address: 200 Vesey St, 24th Floor, New York, NY 10281   
Phone: 775-600-2765  
Email: [dmca@thearenagroup.net](mailto:dmca@thearenagroup.net) Please see [**17 U.S.C. § 512(c)(3)**](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-title17/pdf/USCODE-2011-title17-chap5-sec512.pdf) for the requirements of a proper notification. Also, please note that if you knowingly misrepresent that any activity or material on our Platform is infringing, you may be liable to Arena for certain costs and damages.
      10. PARTNER AND OTHER THIRD-PARTY CONTENT
In addition to Partner Content and Submitted Content, the Platform may also include or link to other content or information provided by or about third-party 

[... truncated at 20,000 characters ...]
