# thearenagroup.net -- Scraped Content

**URL:** https://thearenagroup.net/privacy-policy
**Category:** scrapable
**Scrape status:** DONE
**Source notes:** MP4MF\Separation of Money and State.md
**Scraped:** 2026-04-12

---

[](https://thearenagroup.net/) __
      * [About Us __](https://thearenagroup.net/ "About Us")
      * [Our Brands __](https://thearenagroup.net/our-brands/ "Our Brands")
      * [Leadership __](https://thearenagroup.net/leadership/ "Leadership")
      * [Investors __](http://investors.thearenagroup.net/ "Investors")
      * [Careers __](https://thearenagroup.net/careers/ "Careers")
      * [Press __](https://thearenagroup.net/news-room/ "Press")
      * [Contact __](https://thearenagroup.net/contact-us/ "Contact")
      * __Search __
PRIVACY POLICY **Last Updated and Effective: October 31, 2022** The Arena Group Holdings, Inc., together with its subsidiaries and its affiliated businesses including Athlon Sports, TheStreet, Inc., HubPages, The Arena Platform, Inc., The Arena Media Brands, LLC, and College Spun Media Incorporated (collectively, “ARENA,” “we,” or “us”), combines powerful brands, in areas consumers are passionate about, and delivers compelling experiences. We also offer a digital media platform that allows content creators to monetize content by allowing us and these content creators to show advertisements on such content. We refer to these content creators as “Partners” and to the websites and apps that are on our platform as “Partner Content.” This Privacy Policy applies to the websites listed [**here**](https://thearenagroup.net/our-brands/) and other Partner sites that link to this Privacy Policy. This Privacy Policy explains how ARENA collects, uses, and discloses information about you when you visit our websites and Partner Content, open an account, or publish content with us, contact our customer service team, engage with us on social media, or otherwise interact with us. We collectively refer to these touchpoints as our “Services.”  We may change this Privacy Policy from time to time. If we make changes, we will notify you by revising the date at the top of the policy and, in some cases, we may provide you with additional notice (such as adding a statement to our website homepage or sending you a notification). We encourage you to review the Privacy Policy whenever you access the Services or otherwise interact with us to stay informed about our information practices and the choices available to you. **COLLECTION OF INFORMATION** **INFORMATION YOU PROVIDE TO US** **ACCOUNT INFORMATION** If you wish to use the Services, such as to create or post content, comment on other people’s content or to post your own content to Partners’ content, or if you wish to receive updates or newsletters from us or from our Partners, you will be required to create an ARENA account. When you create an account or use our Services, we ask you to provide certain personally identifiable information such as your first and last name, email address, telephone number, address, and payment card information (collectively, “Personally Identifiable Information”). We may also ask for information such as a profile picture or your social profile information. If your content is supported by advertising or paid subscriptions, we also collect your payment information to allow us to pay you in accordance with your agreement with us.  **OTHER INFORMATION** We also collect any other information you provide directly to us. For example, we collect information when you participate in any interactive features of the Services, fill out a form, participate in a contest or promotion, make a purchase, apply for a job, communicate with us via third party social media sites, request customer support, or otherwise communicate with us.  **INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR USE OF THE SERVICES** **INFORMATION YOU POST** We collect information about the content you post, including any articles, comments, or interaction with other users’ content. We also collect information about how you use the Services, including the Partner Content you view and follow, and how you interact with Partner Content.  **AUTOMATICALLY COLLECTED DATA** When you access or use our Services, we automatically collect certain technical information, including:
      * **Log and Usage Information:** We collect information related to your access to and use of the Services, including the type of browser you use, app version, access times, pages viewed, your IP address, and the page you visited before navigating to our Services.
      * **Device Information:** We collect information about the computer or mobile device you use to access our Services, including the hardware model, operating system and version, unique device identifiers, and mobile network information.
      * **Information Collected by Cookies and Similar Tracking Technologies:** We (and our service providers and Partners) use different technologies to collect information, including cookies and web beacons. Cookies are small data files stored on your hard drive or in device memory that help us improve our Services and your experience, see which areas and features of our Services are popular, and count visits. Web beacons (also known as “pixel tags” or “clear GIFs”) are electronic images that may be used in our Services or emails and help deliver cookies, count visits, and understand usage and campaign effectiveness. For more information about cookies and how to disable them, see [Your Choices](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Jbw7jZj-c-Via4lK8csM2ZplKEsKteS0/edit#bookmark=id.1t3h5sf) below.
**INFORMATION WE COLLECT FROM OTHER SOURCES** We may also obtain information about you from other sources. For example, we may collect information about you from third parties, including but not limited to identity verification services, credit bureaus, mailing list providers, and publicly available sources. Additionally, if you create or log into your account through a social media site or third-party service (like Facebook or Google), we will have access to certain information from that service, such as your name, email address, and profile picture, in accordance with the authorization procedures determined by such social media site or third-party service. **USE OF INFORMATION** We use the information we collect to provide our Services and to customize your experience with the Services, including to show content and advertising that we think is likely to be of interest to you. We also use the information we collect to:
      * Communicate with you about products, services, and events offered by ARENA and others, and provide news and information we think will be of interest to you;
      * Monitor and analyze trends, usage, and activities in connection with our Services; 
      * Detect, investigate, and prevent fraudulent transactions and other illegal activities and protect the rights and property of ARENA and others;
      * Facilitate contests, sweepstakes, and promotions and process and deliver entries and rewards; and
      * Carry out any other purpose described to you at the time the information was collected.
**SHARING OF INFORMATION** When you subscribe to or “follow” one of our Partners, or if you comment or post content on one of our Partner’s pages, you will be providing your username and email address to ARENA as well as to that Partner, who may use such information to contact you and otherwise use and disclose your personal information in accordance with its privacy policy. We will not share your identifying information (such as your name, email address, address, or phone number) with Partners in our coalition except where you decide to provide that information to the Partner, ask us to share it with them, or consent to our sharing it with them.  To allow Partners to earn advertising from their content, we share identifiers that do not identify you personally but may identify your browser or device with Partners and advertising partners as described in the “Advertising and Analytics Services Provided by Others” section below. Our Partners may also collect their own identifiers for these purposes.  We may also share the information we collect as follows:
      * With vendors, service providers, and consultants that perform services for us, including email providers, IT service providers, and web hosting providers; 
      * In response to a request for information if we believe disclosure is in accordance with, or required by, any applicable law or legal process, including lawful requests by public authorities to meet national security or law enforcement requirements;
      * If we believe your actions are inconsistent with our user agreements or policies, if we believe you have violated the law, or to protect the rights, property, and safety of ARENA, Partners, or others;
      * In connection with, or during negotiations of, any merger, sale of company assets, financing or acquisition of all or a portion of our business by another company; 
      * Between and among our current and future parents, affiliates, subsidiaries, and other companies under common control and ownership, including but not limited to Say Media; and
      * With your consent or at your direction.
We may also share aggregated information that cannot reasonably be used to identify you. **THIRD PARTY LINKS AND SERVICES** The Services may contain links to third-party websites such as social media sites and may also contain third-party plug-ins and functionalities (such as the Facebook “like” button and Twitter “follow” button). If you choose to use these sites or features, you may disclose your information not just to those third parties, but also to their users and the public more generally depending on how their services function. We are not responsible for the content or practices of those websites or services. The collection, use, and disclosure of your information will be subject to the privacy policies of the third-party websites or services, and not this Privacy Policy. We urge you to read the privacy and security policies of these third parties. **ADVERTISING, ANALYTICS, AND IDENTITY SERVICES PROVIDED BY OTHERS** We and our Partners may allow others to provide analytics services and serve advertisements on our or their behalf across the web and in mobile applications. These entities may use cookies, web beacons, device identifiers and other technologies to collect information about your visits with websites that use our Services, Partner Content, and other websites and applications, including your IP address, web browser, mobile network information, pages viewed, time spent on pages or in apps, links clicked, and conversion information. This information may be used by ARENA, Partners, and others to, among other things, analyze and track data, determine the popularity of certain content, deliver advertising and content targeted to your interests on our Services and other websites, and better understand your online activity. For more information about interest-based ads, or to opt out of having your web browsing information used for interest-based advertising purposes, please visit [Your Ad Choices](http://www.aboutads.info/choices). Your device may also include a feature (“Limit Ad Tracking” on iOS or “Opt Out of Interest-Based Ads” or “Opt Out of Ads Personalization” or “Opt Out of Interest-Based Ads” on Android) that allows you to opt out of having certain information collected through apps used for behavioral advertising purposes. When you use our Services, we may share information that we collect from you, such as your email (in hashed form), IP address or information about your browser or operating system, with our identity service providers, including LiveRamp Inc. LiveRamp returns an online identification code that we may store in our first-party cookie for our use in online, in-app, and cross-channel advertising and it may be shared with advertising companies to enable interest-based and targeted advertising. To opt out of this use, please visit [LiveRamp’s opt-out page](https://optout.liveramp.com/opt_out). **TRANSFER OF INFORMATION TO THE U.S. AND OTHER COUNTRIES** ARENA is based in the United States and we process and store information in the U.S. and other countries. Therefore, we and our service providers may transfer your information to, or store or access it in, jurisdictions that may not provide equivalent levels of data protection as your home jurisdiction. By using the Services or providing personal information to us, you consent to the transfer of your personal information to the United States and other countries that may not provide equivalent levels of data protection as your home jurisdiction. **YOUR CHOICES** **ACCOUNT INFORMATION** You may update certain account information you provide to us at any time by logging into your account _._ If you wish to delete or deactivate your account, please email us at [privacy@thearenagroup.net](mailto:service@thearenagroup.net), but note that we may retain certain information as required by law or for legitimate business purposes. We may also retain cached or archived copies of information about you for a certain period of time. **COOKIES** Most web browsers are set to accept cookies by default. If you prefer, you can usually choose to set your browser to remove or reject browser cookies. Please note that if you choose to remove or reject cookies, this could affect the availability and functionality of our Services. **PROMOTIONAL COMMUNICATIONS** You may opt out of receiving promotional emails from us by following the instructions in those emails. If you opt out, we may still send you non-promotional emails, such as those about your account or our ongoing business relations.  If you wish to opt out of receiving promotional communications from a Partner, you may do so by following the instructions provided by the Partner.  **CHILDREN’S PRIVACY** We do not knowingly collect personal information from children under 13 and do not allow Partners to host content with us that is intended for children under 13 to participate in our platform. If you are the parent or legal guardian of a child under 13 who provided personal information to us, please contact us at [privacy@thearenagroup.net](mailto:privacy@thearenagroup.net).  **INDIVIDUALS IN THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AREA OR SWITZERLAND** If you are in the European Economic Area (“EEA”) or Switzerland, you have certain rights and protections under the law regarding the processing of your personal data. Note that ARENA is the controller of your personal data when collected in the EU, but that Partners also act as data controllers for the personal data that we share with them and any personal data that Partners may collect independent of our relationship with them. If you have any questions about the processing of your personal data by a Partner, you should contact the Partner directly.  **LEGAL BASIS FOR PROCESSING** If you are in the EEA or Switzerland, when we process your personal data we will only do so in the following situations:
      * We need to use your personal data to perform our responsibilities under our contract with you (e.g., processing payments for and providing the products or services you have requested). 
      * We have a legitimate interest in processing your personal data. For example, we may process your personal data to provide, secure, and improve our products and Services and to communicate with you about our Services.
      * Such processing is necessary to comply with our legal obligations.
      * We have your consent to do so. When consent is the legal basis for our processing, you may withdraw such consent at any time.
**DATA SUBJECT REQUESTS** You have the right to access personal data we hold about you and to ask that your personal data be corrected, erased, or transferred. You may also have the right to object to, or request that we restrict, certain processing. If you would like to exercise any of these rights you may contact us as indicated below in the Contact Us section.  **DATA RETENTION** We store the information we collect on you for as long as is necessary for the purpose(s) for which we originally collected it, or for other legitimate business purposes, including to meet our legal, regulatory, or other compliance obligations. **QUESTIONS OR COMPLAINTS** If you have a concern about our processing of personal data that we are not able to resolve, you have the right to lodge a complaint with the data privacy authority where you reside. For contact details of your Data Protection Authority, please see: <http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/article-29/structure/data-protection-authorities/index_en.htm>. **PRIVACY NOTICE FOR CALIFORNIA RESIDENTS** **Last Updated:** October 31, 2022 This **Privacy Notice for California Residents** supplements the information contained in ARENA’s Privacy Policy and applies solely to visitors, users, and others who reside in the State of California (“consumers” or “you”). We adopt this notice to comply with the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 (CCPA) and any terms defined in the CCPA have the same meaning when used in this Privacy Notice.  **INFORMATION WE COLLECT** We collect information that identifies, relates to, describes, references, is reasonably capable of being associated with, or could reasonably be linked, directly or indirectly, with a particular consumer, household, or device (“**personal information** “). Personal information does not include:
      * Publicly available information from government records.
      * Deidentified or aggregated consumer information.
In particular, we have collected the following categories of personal information from consumers within the last twelve (12) months:  **Category** |  **Examples** |  **Collected**  
---|---|---  
A. Identifiers. |  A real name, alias, postal address, unique personal identifier, online identifier, Internet Protocol address, email address, account name, Social Security number, driver’s license number, passport number, or other similar identifiers. |  YES  
B. Personal information categories listed in the California Customer Records statute (Cal. Civ. Code § 1798.80(e)). |  A name, signature, Social Security number, physical characteristics or description, address, telephone number, passport number, driver’s license or state identification card number, insurance policy number, education, employment, employment history, bank account number, credit card number, debit card number, or any other financial information, medical information, or health insurance information. Some personal information included in this category may overlap with other categories. |  YES  
C. Protected classification characteristics under California or federal law. |  Age (40 years or older), race, color, ancestry, national origin, citizenship, religion or creed, marital status, medical condition, physical or mental disability, sex (including gender, gender identity, gender expression, pregnancy or childbirth and related medical conditions), sexual orientation, veteran or military status, genetic information (including familial genetic information). |  YES  
D. Commercial information. |  Records of personal property, products or services purchased, obtained, or considered, or other purchasing or consuming histories or tendencies. |  YES  
E. Biometric information. |  Genetic, physiological, behavioral, and biological characteristics, or activity patterns used to extract a template or other identifier or identifying information, such as, fingerprints, faceprints, and voiceprints, iris or retina scans, keystroke, gait, or other physical patterns, and sleep, health, or exercise data. |  NO  
F. Internet or other similar network activity. |  Browsing history, search history, information on a consumer’s interaction with a website, application, or advertisement. |  YES  
G. Geolocation data. |  Physical location or movements.  |  YES  
H. Sensory data. |  Audio, electronic, visual, thermal, olfactory, or similar information. |  YES  
I. Professional or employment-related information. |  Current or past job history or performance evaluat

[... truncated at 20,000 characters ...]
