# x.com -- Scraped Content

**URL:** https://x.com/giacomozucco/status/1973796677174624496
**Category:** tweet
**Scrape status:** DONE
**Source notes:** BTC\OP Return Arguments & Knots.md
**Scraped:** 2026-04-12

---

**@giacomozucco** (Giacomo Loathsome Bitcoin Destroyer Zucco)

So, I spent much of yesterday calmly discussing with @adam3us. His intern was not invited. We will do a longer-form public discussion (also with @JeffBooth) sometimes soon, but here's the provisional TLDR (he can correct me if I'm missing or misrepresenting something):
1) We agree that spam exists and is a well-defined issue, that it's a particularly nasty issue for Bitcoin as a global-consensus system (which blockspace fees can't really solve or mitigate much), that it should be denounced/fought as much as possible, that it obviously includes NFT scams and such. He agrees relativist mental gymnastics in this regard are absurd.
2) We agree that resisting State-censorship is socially needed and important, and the ultimate goal of Bitcoin and other cypherpunk tools, and that self-censoring in order to try to appease the State is tactically unreliable short-term, and strategically counterproductive long-term, especially in the context of systems and tool design (legal risk mitigation is rational on the individual/company level).
3) We agree that, while fighting spam (and not "spam") is a good engineering goal and not at all "censorship", it's also inherently hard to do so effectively in censorship-resistance-optimized systems, and while it could be done to some degree with consensus rules enforcement, it's a uphill battle to do it with mempool policies enforcement, especially if there's no unitary front in the latter ant things like LibreRelay and Slipstream exist. We also agree that people who still want to try to do this should not be mocked or antagonized, even if we are skeptical of the result. 
4) We kinda agree that the management of the issue within the Bitcoin Core governance process have been poor and sub-optimal (we disagree in emphasis: he thinks it has been lacking, I think it was an unmitigated dumpster-fire-like disaster). We agree that if this was managed in the same way as the Full-RBF debate (and to some degree the Taproot activation debate, on which he's more charitable/white-pilled than me), we would be already chilling on some kind of status quo that almost nobody loves but almost everybody accepts.
5) We kinda disagree that the wave of US-originated woke madness is particularly relevant to the current debate: he acknowledges the existence of this politically-charged mass hysteria, often leveraged for power struggles and hostile takeovers, and the heavy influence it reached withing software development (particularly in FLOSS: from NixOS to Linux, to FSF to Rust, etc.), but it doesn't think this is currently prominent among Bitcoin devs, or it's currently being weaponized for governance takeover attempts. He doesn't think the social phenomenon has significantly impacted the quality of code production and review in Core.
5) We disagree that running Knots for non-mining nodes is a good answer to the (very real and very relevant) spam issue: while he acknowledges the social-signaling effect of doing so and its relevance in the broader picture, he is very concerned by the security implications of the vast code diffs between Core and Knots, especially if one runs the latter as wallet, or in support of an L2 which depends heavily on liveliness and race conditions (like LN). I'm not: I don't use either Core/Knots/LibreRelay for wallet stuff, and I use an old Core for CLN. Also, while I acknowledge the Knots risk, I'm way more pessimistic than him about Core risks.
6) We disagree on the blame distribution in terms of vitriolic attacks, strawman arguments, hyperbolic accusations, bad-faith moves, tribalism, blind and emotional reactions among the two "camps": while he acknowledges the presence of those dynamics in "both camps", his impression is that "Core is better" in this regard, while mine is opposite (this extends on our judgment of some of the individuals involvement).
7) We disagree on the political feasibility of different anti-spam proposals and course of actions: while I'm somewhat skeptical that the "filtering movement" will achieve anything more than slowing down and mitigating the misguided "spam-welcoming path" that Bitcoin seemed to be on, I'm also totally skeptical that we can find agreement for soft-fork based mitigations, while he thinks a consensus change may have better user support than mempool policy games.

Overall, we agree that, most likely, spam will not kill Bitcoin, and mempool filters will not kill Bitcoin, and illegal files will not kill Bitcoin, and law-related panic will not kill Bitcoin, and CoreV30 will not kill Bitcoin, and Knots will not kill Bitcoin, and wokeness will not kill Bitcoin, and "distributed authoritarians" like me (lol) will not kill Bitcoin. We mostly disagree about his intern: I say he should fire him, he says that he brings good coffee.
